1234 1234 1234 1234 1234
1234 1234 1234
This is May 6th, I believe, and sitting in the very
quiet and pleasant living room with Barney Welch
and chatting with him about his years in College
Station.
For someone who might listen to this or read it some
years in the future and who might not know you, Give
a brief summary of your background before you came
to A&M to be employed. Where'd you grow up? I was
born in Eichel, Texas, September 3, 1922. I moved
from there at about three years old to Cleburne. My
father worked for J.C. Penney's. This was in the
middle of the 20s, right before the Depression
hit. The Depression came. My dad moved to
Stephenville, Texas, where I grew up. I went to
high school in Stephenville. I was graduated at
midterm, and I was not going to school until the
fall. I had a football scholarship to Rice
University. I didn't know anything about Rice. I
went to Houston and worked for Hughes Tools. I was
doing what they call parking lots. They had split
shifts in those days, and I would go out at 3 o'clock
in the afternoon and park several hundred cars or
direct parking in at night. And I stayed there
three or four months, and I got awfully homesick
because I had never been away from home that far.
And one time I decided to see if I could leave, and I
called a friend of mine named Darius Mosier at A&M
who was a football player. And I said, Darius, I
don't like it down here. And he said, well, get your
butt up to East Texas. So I went to Overton, Texas,
and went to work for a man named Bert Fox, who was a
class of 22, I think, who was doing almost all the
work in those days. Actually, we lived in New
London, where they had a terrible explosion in
1937. So I stayed there until... school and then I
came down to Texas A&M. Alright, but keep going
until you come here to be a... Oh, employee. Okay, I
came in 1941. I came on the scholarship here. We
played in 41 and 42 and then all the basically fit
sophomores were inducted as privates into the
Army. They had told us that Being as we had two years
of ROTC, we were chosen men, so we conducted as
private and infantry. And I left A&M in June of 43
and went to Camp Maxey, Texas, which is in Paris,
Texas. We were up there, took our basic training.
There were kids from what they called the 8th Corps
area. It was Oklahoma, Texas, Arkansas,
Louisiana, and I don't know why. We stayed there,
took our basic, and then the Army said, we don't
need all these guys right now, so they established
what was called the ASTP, Army Reserve Training
Program, Army Specialized Training Program. So
my group, about 300 or 400 of us, went to Commerce,
Texas, and were learning and taking engineering,
which I had not had. I had been at ECO at A&M. But I got
some awfully good instruction, and we stayed
there for several months, about four or five
months. Then the Army, the federal government
decided they needed us, so we went back to Camp
Maxey, took our training, and then shipped out to
Europe in the infantry, where I spent about 30
months over there. I was in the 99th Infantry
Division. I served in three different battles.
including Battle of the Balls and Remagen Bridge
and some others. After the war, in Europe, the way
you came home was by points. You had to have so many
points. If you were married, you had so many. If you
were so many months in service. I happened to be
married. I had married just before I left to go into
service. But I had about nine months to spend in
Europe. And Patton happened to come through my
division one time and didn't think the military
courtesy was good enough, so he sent a regiment of
us down to Nuremberg, Germany, where the war
tribunals were going to be held. At that time, I had
been transferred from the 99th to Big Red One,
first in condition. And we had 10,000 SS troopers
under a stalag about six kilometers outside of
Nuremberg, and every morning we would take all
those guys into Nuremberg, put 15, two and a half
ton truck, would have guards in the front and back,
and they would spend the day cleaning up the debris
that Nuremberg had suffered when we actually
fought in Nuremberg. What happened, we couldn't
take Nuremberg, so somebody pulled us back and
they bombed it and shelled it real heavy. But then,
after that, I came home and I shipped out of
Marseille, France, Christmas Eve, 1945, and was
discharged at Tyler, Texas in 1946. And that was
January, so I still had some time before I got back
to A&M, and I worked just during day labor there at
Stephenville until we came back to A&M in 1946. All
right, and then you came as a student, graduated. I
came back as a junior. At that time, there were no
motels, no hotels, except on the campus that had
one was called Aggieland Inn? Aggieland Inn,
yeah. Well, a guy named Pinky Downs, who's quite a
famous Aggie, who at that time was the ticket agent
for the football, I mean, athletic department. He
got me an apartment in Bryan. My wife and I had a
little boy that was three years old. We lived there
for a few months, and then I moved to a place called
Blue Top Courts out to Eastgate. And we stayed
there for... several months, and then Mr.
Gilchrist, who was president, bought a bunch of
army barracks from Victoria, Texas, moved them up
here a little bit north of the campus called
College View, and as we finished one, it let some
people move in. You moved in according to your day
of graduation, and they took each one of these
barracks and made four apartments of it. They had a
little with two little bedrooms, a living and
dining room, and a little kitchen. And we moved
into there, paying $28 a month. And there was lots
of us. We were all in the same boat. Nobody had any
money. We had about $90 a month from the GI Bill. And
because I was on scholarships, I was better than
most of them. And we lived there. And I went ahead
and played two more years of ball. One summer, the
last year that I was in school, I was up in Pine
intramurals softball for a guy named Spike White,
who at that time was director of student
activities under Mr. Pemberton. He was dean of
men. And Spike asked me, when I was about to
graduate and make terms, I'd be interested in
taking over the intramural department, which he
had until he moved up to director of student
activities. 27, I guess, then, and had a child and
jumped at that. And I had the opportunity to play
pro ball, but I didn't think I could make it because
I'd been at it too long. I didn't think I was good
enough first place. All right, so you go on the
payroll then as a full-time employee. And when was
that, 47? That was January, no, January of 48. 48.
And do you remember what your starting pay was?
$2,400. $2,400 for 12 months. 12 months. And in
general, describe your duties as director of
intramural. Well, for the people who do not know,
intramural means within, of course. And this was a
program that was strictly for the students. At
that time, they were all boys here, and there was
nothing else in this community. There was no night
clubs, no eating places, no girls. There was
nothing for these jokers to do. So we had a very
strong intramural program. We had, at that time,
the core outfits. A infantry would play B infantry
and so forth and so forth. And we had about, oh, I
don't know, 30, 40 sports they could participate
in, like football and basketball and horseshoes
and tennis and all that stuff. And that was my
responsibility to oversee that program, to
schedule it, to direct it. I didn't have any help,
and that was Secretary didn't have anything. Of
course, we even saved old nails out of boards to use
them on. The only money we got was from that. from
the exchange store money. We had an exchange
store, as you know. And they declared profits each
year, and they supported a lot of student
activities. And intramurals got, I don't
remember, like $70,000, $80,000 a year, maybe a
little bit more to operate that program. That's
probably what it was. All right, and where did
intramural games and contests largely take
place? On the campus. No, but where? Physically.
Okay. Behind Duncan Messall, which is now called
Duncan Drillfield, we had softball fields there.
The basketball was at the Grove, and we used some of
D-wear when we could get in. After they built G.
Roddy White, we used part of it upstairs there. The
rifle was under the stadium. Softball was on the
field, as I said. We had a football, we had five
football fields south of Kyle Field that were
strictly intramurals. There hadn't been parking
for football, but we finally got to put a chain
around it so we could keep it nice and clean and so
forth. Were there any sports that y'all included
that today would be considered a little unusual?
Like y'all didn't play field hockey, you didn't
play... No, we didn't play hockey, we didn't play
any of those, what we call, we didn't play soccer.
It was the thing that we played in high school. And
didn't play horseshoes. We did horseshoes. Oh,
you did horseshoes. We had a great horseshoe
program. And we had a bowling program once the MSC
was built. We had a ping pong program. We had golf.
Polo was gone. Polo was gone. That was when I was a
sophomore. And do you have any idea how many
students... participated in interviews. At that
time, after the war, when I left here in 43, I think,
when I came back, it was terrible. We had 9,000
kids. Now, they weren't all core. We had two
programs there. Then we had the military and what
we called the non-reg, the civilians. And the
civilians played, but they were not as
competitive or as... intent as the Corps was, in
order to get the George Moore flag, which is the top
board you can get at Texas A&M, you had to have some
intramural points. So they really played, not
only they played intramural because they liked
it, because they were young and they enjoyed
working out, plus there was nothing else to do,
they also wanted some George Moore. Does that
trophy go way back? Well, I understand George
Moore was at Corregidor getting more. Oh, so... So
he must have been back in... But where the trophy
came from, it was here when I got here. Okay. And was
there... I've heard that there was a great deal of
prestige connected with winning that trophy. Oh,
very much. We made a big deal out of it. Was there any
outfit that was regularly the winner? The
infantry won it eight years ago. Infantry won it?
Well, just for eight years, I know. Why? What did
they do? They wouldn't recruit. Mm-hmm. Now I
don't know if you remember, or you know about it,
whoever's going to hear this, but Hazen was
terribly bad after we came back after the war.
Really got terribly bad. Mainly because the kids
were, they hadn't gone through it themselves and
they didn't know what it was all about. It got so bad
that the kids were moved to Annex, remember? So
they had their own, we had our own separate program
for them out there. So some of the units on campus
would go recruit These kids out there, it's like
you're doing football. And they find the athletes
and they bring them in. Well, they actually just
worked that hard the rest of them did. I see. Did
you, were you responsible for the intramurals out
at the annex? Yes, but a guy named Luke Harrison
took care of it. I think he was, you know Luke. He
kind of ran them, but it all came under my program.
But I didn't actually go out there like I did on the
campus. All right, now these folks that you
mentioned, Spike White, describe him. Okay, he's
probably the best friend I ever had. His boss was a
guy named Penberthy. Yes, yes. Mr. Penberthy at
that time was the most loved man probably ever on
this campus. He came here in 1924, I think, from
Ohio State, and he started the intramural program
and the physical education program and ran it.
About 1937, Spike was graduating from A&M, and he
He was an electrical engineer and worked in
Dallas, Texas, but he didn't like that. He wanted
to be in the recreation. So he came back and got a
degree in recreation at Mr. Penberthy. Asked him
to take over the annual program, which he did. Then
Mike went to the Navy during the war. And then when
he came back, before the war, we did not have a dean
of men here at Texas A&M commanding everything.
There was a guy named... Who was the first one? Went
on to East Texas to coach football. I don't know.
I'll come back. We had one man who was made dean of
men, but he had had a run-in with one of the board of
regents early, back in the early years, and they
got rid of him. And I can't thank Samuel O'Neill. So
then they asked Mr. Penberthy to become dean of
men, and it's my understanding that Mr. Gilchrist
and some others asked begged him or encouraged him
not to take it. When he was dean of men, he had
responsibility for all the discipline but no
control over the Corps. So he became the bad guy.
He's one that had to kick him out of school. And
going from the greatest man that probably ever
came to Texas at that time, he became one of the most
disliked. He was even ridiculed in the battalion,
which is under his role in being this guy. But
anyway, Spike was the guy that built up the golf
course here at Texas A&M. Spike built the rodeo
arena, which is now where Olsen Field is. Spike
really built up all the dances, the graduations,
all that stuff with understudent activities. He,
well, I don't know. He was one of the finest men. He
was one of the finest men, I guess I would say. But he
later, what he's really done since then, he bought
a boys camp in Branson, Missouri in 1954 called
Candy Cup Camp for Boys, which had originally
belonged to Dope Walker's father in the 1920s.
Really? Dope Walker's daddy would take kids from
Dallas down there. We're talking about his money.
Take them down there and work out. Then a man named
Bill Lance, who was a track coach at Tulsa Central,
took it over. Mm-hmm. And Spike bought it in 54.
Well, in 55, my wife and I went up there with Spike.
We had 60 boys, and we kept them for eight weeks. We
had little boys. We had captains one through 12. We
kept them for eight weeks. Some of these kids were
like nine years old. I doubt if many parents would
turn a nine-year-old into somebody for eight
weeks. Last year, 1998, that camp had 15,000,
which had become a Boys and Girls camp. It's the
largest Boys and Girls Christian camp in the
world, I guess. I know in Missouri, many, many
students were really impressed that I knew about
the camp and knew the whites. We had guys, women,
girls and boys flying in from Spain, from South
America. We had Edward Sennacher, Tom Landers,
grandkids, you name any great Outstanding person
in this United States, and they probably got
somebody to thank too. All right, let's go back for
a minute to both Mr. Penberthy and Mr. White. What
made them such special people? What were their
qualities? Give some examples. They were
Christians. Okay. That's the main thing. Okay.
And they liked people. Now, Doe Raleigh, this guy
was trying, Doe was the first one. Mr. Penberthy
was always, if I had to compare anybody to St. Paul,
I'd pick him. Okay. He can't, of course. But I'll
tell you an example of Spike. After Spike got his
degree in electrical engineering, he went out to
California to work on a master's. He worked in a
foundry at night to go to school. And you know what
kind of people he was. He took his Aggie ring off
because he didn't want those people to think he was
better than me. That's what kind of guy he was. I've
never known a man... Spike, every night, he'd get
down on his knees and pray. Thanks to God for taking
care of him. They're just Christian men. They
never talked, but they lived a Christian life.
Plus, they were interested in young men. I don't
know. If you've got that, you can do anything.
Right now, intramurals reported to Spike. Spike
reported to Pembroke. Mr. Penberthy reported to
the president? Okay. Now, Mr. Penberthy was dean
of men, and they had two branches, student
activities and student affairs. Benny Zinn was
head of student affairs. The back was head of
student activities. This all came about after the
war. Benny Zinn had everything pertaining to the
college, the police, the mess halls, stuff. all
this back at everything else presently give you a
crisp yet described
back up a little bit what i know that he played
became a very different
he was texas he
came here i think in nineteen thirty seven and
I understand this, and I can't prove it, you
probably know, but he's responsible for the
Goldside Park and for planting the flowers in
Texas. That I believe is true. And he was
president, and what I loved about that man, I was on
a couple of little small committees, he would call
a meeting, and he did not go away from the agenda. If
we're going to be there five minutes, he started
time, and he quit. We didn't talk football. We
didn't talk about religion. We didn't talk
politics. He stepped to the agenda, kept to the
agenda. Once this time was up, then you could do
whatever you wanted to. But he was very, very
organized
and a very honest man. I went to see him after he
retired. In fact, he lived right behind this back
over here. And I'd go out and visit. We'd talk and
all. He said, you know, I don't think he was
complaining. He said, you know, hardly anybody
ever comes to me. He was the president. And you know
as well as I do that A&M is a cold-blooded
organization. It can be. It can be very
cold-blooded. Now, his son about your age was...
No, he was a little bit under his son's name, Henry
Gilchrist. He's a lawyer in Dallas with a big law
firm. Were you... When the students marched on the
president's house about hazing, were you back
when that occurred? I got involved in it when it
went away. You want me to tell you that story? Yes. I
lived in College U. We worked out football, and I
was walking home and happened to go through what at
that time was the assembly hall, where we used to
have free movies on Saturday night. And it was
right across the street from Preston's home, and I
walked by, and there was this huge crowd of people
in there. Being curious, I walked in there, and
they were having a meeting about Gilchrist. And a
lot of the state radio networks, I don't have any
words, were here. And one guy got up in Clinton, but
he knew that Gilchrist went every weekend down on
the coast to a ship and took women out. Another said
that he was absconding with funds from the
exchange store and the wind tunnel. I've never
been in a mall back and forth. It was horrible, just
terrible. Everybody cheered. Nobody didn't even
know who Gil Gilchrist was. Colonel Frank
Anderson, another great guy here, who at one time
had been commandant with dear friend of Gil, came
out on the stage, like I say now, had on his uniform.
He was not military at that time. He was practical.
He came out on the stage in full military and tried
to talk to defend Gil Gilchrist. It was horrible. I
later apologized to Gibb because I didn't, I said I
didn't have enough guts to stand up and defend you.
And I was just like, okay, I'll sit down and listen.
As you know, the Corps marched on his home at
midnight with the band. And he didn't even give
them the courtesy to come to the front door, which I
really admired. Gibb Gilchrist, between College
Station and Hearn, there is an underpass over a
railroad track. And he used to be criticized
severely because the road that's going to Highway
6 is going down this direction, north, and then it
veers a little bit northwest and goes around back
to north and goes on through. And they said that he
built this crooked road under that railroad
crossing. But it turns out the state law requires
that all undercrosses have to be a 90-degree
angle. But he was criticized worse than Mr.
Pemberthy was in the battalions. And primarily, I
think it was because he went to Texas University.
Well, and also, wasn't he trying to terminate all,
some of that hazing? Yeah, he, well, yeah,
everybody's talking. Yes, he was. In fact, I don't
know if this is true or not, but I heard at the time
that we came within one or two votes to lose McCord
from the state congressman because of hazing. And
the hazing was terrible. Now, the hazing was bad
when I was here But people don't really
understand. We didn't think it was bad. What was
bad, when we as sophomores left here, left kids who
had never gone through the Hazen program in
charge, and they just went wild. They would march
attention to Herndon, Texas. Sure. They'd stand
them up at attention in the showers. When I was in
the murals, I'd be walking down Joe Brout
Boulevard and see these upper class and take these
freshmen standing there and Screaming and
hollering at them and blowing smoke in their face.
Wouldn't even let them go to class. And I'd get
right in the middle of it. It got that bad. It got
away from this fun thing of busting your butt to
this thing of mental haste, which is so bad. All
right, so now you directed intramurals for how
long? Until 1961. 61, so... Then I left. So 15?
Well, from 48 to... Eight, 11, 13 years. 13 years.
When you left Intramurals, what changes were
there? Me or them? Them. Well, today people still
think I work at A&M. I've lived here 57 years. And I
don't know. A&M to me is where it's changed. It's
kind of like your children you were talking about.
You're with them. so much when they're little, and
that you don't notice these gradual little
changes as they get older. Now, the Aggies that
come back, been gone 15 years, they come back, see
this campus, they can't believe it. But when you
grow up with it, you don't pay attention to it. But
changes, the Corps was the same, the civilians
were the same. The Corps was losing more of its
advantage, I think, used to, whenever a Corps kid
ran for office, he was going to win it, take a yellow
and stuff like that. Civilians come in. But in 61,
had you all changed the number of sports involved?
Are you talking about the intramural? Yeah. No,
no, they stayed the same. They're still today.
Today they're so much bigger than we were then.
Your facilities were about the same? The
facilities kept going the same until just after
the girls got here. The girls changed things.
Right, let's see. Then in terms of leadership,
Spike left. Who replaced him? being a student.
Well, that's when MSC opened up, seeing all that
moved over there, when Wayne Stark took over. Now,
your friend, Charles McCann, took my job. Charles
worked for me when he was a student, a dollar an
hour. And when I decided to leave to go into
insurance business, they... Mr. Petey asked me,
could you recommend? And I said, well, there's
only one guy that can do it. He's ever been around.
It's Charles McKenna. He's in school down here. He
came on up here, and he later became a provost. He
took it, and a guy named Les Palmer took it, and some
others. But I used to get awfully unhappy when I had
intramurals that nobody would come down and watch
it from the campus. I said, man, that's the
greatest thing we've got on this world. Nope. I'd
call Mr. Gilkerson. He'd come down. Mr. Rudder
would come down sometime. Then, you know, I left.
I've never been back over there. Never have seen
him again. During your era, who else had an
intramural program similar to A&M's? Texas and
Ohio State probably had the two greatest. I went to
a convention one time. They were way ahead of us.
They ran a little differently. procedures but
Texas probably had a better not better but equal to
us but they had more selfies and Ohio State was
claimed most to say they had the greatest they
probably did right in that 13 years more kids began
to get automobiles and so forth but did the
participation rate remain it did in the course
because it was kind of compulsory. The civilians
was not, but it kept up, but the civilians did not
keep up with the Corps. For example, we had two of
everything. We had a freshman football team and an
up-class football team. We had a freshman
basketball team. Each outfit had to have two
seats, so we got every one of the kids like that.
They didn't have a lot of choice for anything,
particularly in wrestling, boxing, and those
things, so we finally cut those out. All right, now
let's see. Mr. Penberthy... He held that job. I
don't remember how long. A long time. Yeah, and
what happened there? I don't know. Did he got
shafted? Was he replaced by Hennigan? No, yes, I
think. Let me tell you what happened without going
into why. This man in 1924 or whatever came here and
started this thing from scratch. He was head of the
PE department when he left and went to being a man,
which a lot of people didn't want him to. After he
left being a man, he went back to the PE department
as an instructor in volleyball because he needed
to finish out his tenure to get his retirement. He
even went to, and I didn't know this while he told me
this, he went to California to learn about
volleyball. And he came back to hear Carl Landis.
and Carl Tishler were running a program who he had
hired, and he was a little peon for us raising to it
and working. Not many men could do that. That's
right. And never, ever has he ever criticized
that. Right. All right, let's see. Did you have any
relationship with President Morgan? No. Because
I don't find many people that remember him and have
many comments about him. All right, when
President Rutter comes in 59, did he have any
interest in intramurals, as you recall? Yeah,
well, of course, that wasn't his agenda, but I told
you this morning, Earl Coates at Carlton State in
1939-40, when I was senior high school, and that's
when I first met him. Now, we weren't
buddy-buddies, because he was just a rural Rutter
in the last 32 years. But when he came down here, my
daughter happened to be the same age as his two
daughters, and they went to school together. My
nephew and Bob, Bud, his son, were roommates here
when they were friends. Oh, really? So, and
Margaret and I were good friends. We all went to
Method Church for a place, and Pinky Downs was
there, you know. Yeah. But Earl was, I didn't see
him a lot, but. I've got some letters in there he's
written me, and I like everybody else. Somebody
says, I think we need a dormitory just to house all
his roommates, and
that's what I'm doing. But, yes, if I wanted
something, I didn't go to him, certainly, but he
would talk to me, and we were on...